# PHPFUI\ORM Migrations
*__Note__: Referenced namespaces in this document refer to the **PHPFUI\ORM** defaults.*

Migrations convert the data from one version of the database to another.  They are atomic and can be run individually or in a group.  Even if run in a group, they can still be reverted individually.

## Migration Philosophy
PHPFUI/ORM is a schema first ORM. This makes it easy to initialize the ORM from an existing database. Use migrations to alter the schema, then use a variation of the generateCRUD.php script to generate the **Definition** files.

## Migration Table
The table `migration` keeps track of the current version of the database.  It contains the version number and the time it was run for deployment tracking.

## Running Migrations
You use the [\PHPFUI\ORM\Migrator](http://phpfui.com/?n=PHPFUI%5CORM&c=Migrator) class to run migrations. An example command line script example:
```php
$migrate = new \PHPFUI\ORM\Migrator();
$level = (int)($argv[1] ?? 0);
if ($level)
  {
  $migrate->migrateTo($level);
  }
else
  {
  $migrate->migrate();
  }
\print_r($migrate->getErrors());
```
You can include this logic in your deployment for full control of when migrations happen.  The **migrateTo()** method will run the migrations in the correct order (up or down).  You can also run migrations individually.

## Migration Architecture
Migrations are located in the **\App\Migration** namespace.  They must be a class named Migration_**X** where **X** is an integer number. Migrations must start with 1 and be contigious integers without gaps to the last migration. Gaps in the sequence are not allowed. Migrations are run by migration number and not date to avoid sync conflicts on release that plague more common migration systems. Conflicts with migrations due to branching are handled by git at merge time.

Typical migration:
```php
namespace PHPFUI\ORM\Migration;

class Migration_1 extends \PHPFUI\ORM\Migration
  {
  public function description() : string
    {
    return 'Create migation table';
    }

  public function down() : bool
    {
    return $this->dropTable('migration');
    }

  public function up() : bool
    {
    // drop the table just in case
    $this->down();

    return $this->runSQL('create table migration (migrationId int(11) NOT NULL primary key, ran TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP);');
    }
  }
```
Migrations must be inherited from [\PHPFUI\ORM\Migration](http://phpfui.com/?n=PHPFUI%5CORM&c=Migration).  They must have the following methods defined:
- **description**() : string, returns a human readable description of what the migration does.
- **up**() : bool, performs SQL statements to take the database to the next version. Returns true on success.
- **down**() : bool, reverts the up and leaves the database in the prior version state. Returns true on success.

## Running migrations from code
The [\PHPFUI\ORM\Migrator](http://phpfui.com/?n=PHPFUI%5CORM&c=Migrator) class is used to run migrations automatically.  Use the **migrate**() method to go to the latest version, or **migrateTo**() for a specific version.  The class handles running migrations in the correct order. The **getStatus**() result should be shown to the user.

## Caveats
- All migrations need to run reliably up and down and back up again.
- Do not depend on **\App\Table** or **\App\Record** classes, as their definition can change over time (due to migrations), so fields existing in a early migration might not exist in the most recent version of the schema.  A user upgrading from an old version to a modern version may not have the same definition of a **\App\Record** and the migration can throw an error.
- Some migrations that are data migrations may not need a functional down() method.  It can just return true.  Also other database mods (like adding an index) might not need a down migration.
- All migrations should be rerunable even if they fail mid migration.
- Alter statements are cached per table.  Use **executeAlters()** method if you need to update a table after an alter statement.

## Available methods to make migrations easier

- **addColumn**(string $table, string $field, string $parameters) : bool
	- Always adds a column
- **addForeignKey**(string $toTable, string $referenceTable, array $columns, string $onDelete = 'CASCADE', string $onUpdate = 'CASCADE') : bool
	- Creates a foreign key on the table referencing the given table and columns.
- **addIndex**(string $table, array $fields, string $indexType = '') : bool
	- Add an index on the fields in the array.
- **alterColumn**(string $table, string $field, string $parameters) : bool
	- Alters a column type. Use renameColumn if you need to change the name
- **executeAlters**() : bool
	- Run all the cached alter statements.  You will need to call if this directly if you need to change a table altered in the current migration
- **runSQL**(string $sql, array $input = []) : bool
	- Runs the current SQL statement immediately
- **deleteDuplicateRows**(string $table, array $keys) : bool
	- Duplicate rows with the same key values will be deleted
- **dropPrimaryKey**(string $table) : bool
	- Drops the primary key
- **addPrimaryKeyAutoIncrement**(string $table, string $field = '', string $newFieldName = '') : bool
	- Adds a primary key to the table.  If $field is not specified, it will the primary key will be the table name with Id appended.  If $newFieldName is not specified, it will default to $field. This method works on an existing field only.
- **dropColumn**(string $table, string $field) : bool
	- Drops a column if it exists
- **dropForeignKey**(string $table, array $columns) : bool
	- Drops the foreign key on the table
- **dropIndex**(string $table, string | array $fields) : bool
	- Drops an index by the name used by addIndex
- **dropAllIndexes**(string $table) : void
	- Drops all indexes on a table but not the primary key.
- **dropTable**(string $table) : bool
	- Drops a table if it exists
- **dropTables**(array $tables) : void
	- Drops tables contained in the array
- **dropView**(string $view) : bool
	- Drops a view if it exists
- **dropViews**(array $views) : void
	- Drops views contained in the array
- **getAllTables**(string $type = 'BASE TABLE') : array
	- Return array containing table names
- **getMySQLSetting**(string $variable) : string
	- Get a MySQL setting
- **indexExists**(string $table, string $indexName) : bool
	- Tests for existance of an index on the table
- **renameColumn**(string $table, string $field, string $newName) : bool
  - Renames a column, use alterColumn to change the column type
- **renameTable**(string $oldName, string $newName) : bool
	- Renames an existing table

